# Simple-Principle-Component-Analysis-PCA
Principle Component Analysis in R for dimensionality reduction and comparison of eigenvalues from geochemical data. Example Application Below:

Micro X-Ray Fluorescence: Using Multivariate Analysis to Examine Elemental Trends in Siliciclastic Sediment Cores from Range Creek Canyon
Benjamin Marconi
Abstract 
	Siliciclastic sediment cores collected from an Ancestral Puebloan site in Range Creek Canyon, Utah, were analyzed with micro X-ray fluorescence (XRF) to constrain the relative abundance of light elements in a region harboring evidence of ancient agriculture. XRF data were processed and analyzed with principle component analysis (PCA) to examine the source(s) of variability in alluvial sediment elemental composition, with particular interest in signatures ranging from sodium to molybdenum. Although the canyon’s Fremont and Ancestral Puebloan artifacts are exquisitely preserved, geological complexities stemming from multifarious valley-floor stratigraphy and ineffective age modelling have left largely untouched the impacts of late Holocene climate variability on the ancient population. XRF is employed as a first order investigation in a series of long-term geochemical analyses aimed at constraining climatic and hydrological shifts across the last 10,000 years at the site. Preliminary results of PCA analysis on three cores collected in an east-west transect from the Range Creek valley suggest the driving forces of mineral abundance are: (1.) fluvial deposition (likely transporting materials from organic-rich shale and sandstone beds stratigraphically above the study region); (2.) diagenesis of sediment post accumulation; (3.) cation exchange from groundwater flow. 
Introduction 
	Range Creek Canyon lies in Central Southern Utah at the intersection of the Basin and Range Province and the Colorado Plateau. The canyon is located along the western flank of the Tavaputs Plateau and is drained by Range Creek, a thirty-mile long stream that meets the Green River to the southwest. The perennial stream originates at Bruin Point, more than 10,000 feet above sea level, and flows through Tertiary shales and sandstones to the point of confluence with the Green River at 4,200 feet (Metcalfe and Arnold, 2012). The region’s exaggerated topographic relief distinguishes it from other archaeologically significant sites in North America, as the canyon’s native inhabitants lived and recreated along the canyon’s steep escarpments and cliff faces. 
	The study region is located in the Book Cliff-Roan Plateau subsection of the Colorado Plateau Providence. The highly resistant Book Cliffs are Upper Cretaceous in age and are defined by complex lateral intertonguing of marine and continental facies, remnants of the Cretaceous Interior Seaway. 	Terrestrial siliciclastic deposits of the Star Point and Price River formations contrast the lagoonal and marine deposits of the Mancos shale to the canyon’s east. The sediment packages comprising the Book Cliffs represent shallow basin deposits punctuated by sharp pulses of subsidence (Young, 1955). The steady periods of deposition between subsidence are characterized by the formation of thick peat beds, which result in a depositional cycle consisting of marine shales, littoral marine sandstones, lagoonal sediments, and finally coal (Swift et al., 1987). 
Figure 1.
 
	The Book Cliffs are overlain to the north by the Roan Cliffs, a Paleocene formation generated by the combined effects of the uplift of the basement-cored San Rafael structure and fluvial deposition in low-gradient, progradational deltaic systems feeding ancient Lake Flagstaff and Lake Uinta (Morris et al., 1991, Franczyk et al., 1991). These formations have abundant fossil evidence of the ancient seaway that once stretched its shoreline across the study region, and possess organic carbon content sufficient to influence the effectiveness of accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) radiocarbon dating down-dip at the field station on the valley floor. Understanding the geological complexities of Range Creek’s 90,000-acre watershed is vital to effectively interpreting geochemical analyses of sediment collected at the site. Additionally, the region’s geological complexities contribute to multifarious valley-fill, producing multifaceted shallow stratigraphy influenced by fluvial processes and colluvium from the steep canyon walls. The intricate intertonguing of deposits at Cherry Meadows (CM) (the flat stream-side region where samples were collected) requires microfacies analysis and comparison of numerous core samples to deconstruct the underlying depositional history of the site.  
	Ancient occupation of Range Creek Canyon is thought to have occurred between A.D. 300 and A.D. 1300, with the most intense period of Fremont activity around the year A.D. 1050 (Kloor, 2007). To explore the relationship between the Fremont people and their environment, sediment collected from twelve cores in a 100m long, east to west verging trench on the valley floor was transported for laboratory analysis in the University of Utah’s Records of Environment and Disturbance (RED) Laboratory. The PCA analysis on micro-XRF obtained elemental data from three of these core samples is discussed in this paper. 
	PCA is a useful tool in XRF-based investigations as it allows for the dimensional decomposition of the large cloud of geochemical data produced by high-spatial resolution scanning of samples. The data undergoes an orthogonal transformation to convert unique observations into a set of values of linearly uncorrelated variables, each of which represents one “principal component” (PC). By nature, the first (PC) explains the greatest amount of variance within the dataset and PCn+1 explains less than the former. Because each principle component must be orthogonal to that which precedes it, the largest possible explainable variance by each individual component decreases with future components (Hotelling, 1993 and Maitra et al., 2002). The direction of the analysis eigenvectors reflects the strength (and positive vs. negative correlation) of each association, so, for example, clusters of elements that plot high along the PC1 axis are strongly associated with a first-order geological/geochemical process in that location.  
Methods
Experimental Methodology
	Following the excavation of an approximately 120m long, 1m deep trench in the Cherry Meadows floodplain in the central region of Range Creek Canyon, sediment cores were collected at equal intervals using a VibraCore system. Sediments were transported to the University of Utah where core tubes were split lengthwise and scanned with a Bruker Tracer III-SD portable X-Ray Fluorescence instrument (pXRF). XRF scans were performed at 2.0mm intervals for the length of the core in three bands: helium (filter absent in the presence of standard noble gas), yellow filter and green filter. Analytical spectroscopy with the Bruker III uses a rhodium (Rh) X-ray source and palladium (Pd) slits, meaning that Rh and Pd spectra are always present in scans unless corrected for. The contamination of data by the X-ray system can obscure the chlorine (Cl) and sulfur (S) elemental signatures, thus numerous filters were applied to increase the instrument’s sensitivity to numerous elements. 
	General analysis with the helium wall-gas emits X-rays from 1 to 40 keV, inducing fluorescence in elements through plutonium, but without Cl and S spectra. The yellow filter scan emits radiation from 12 to 40 keV, which has poor sensitivity for elements below calcium, but strong detection for titanium (Ti) through bismuth (Bi). To isolate heavier elements, a third scan (green filter) was utilized, which emits X-rays from 17 to 40 keV and returns reliable signals from iron (Fe) to molybdenum (Mo). These three unique scans were synthesized in R to generate one data table containing elemental spectra from sodium (Na) to Mo, resulting in one corrected table for each respective core. In order to be able to interpret elemental data quantitatively, a calibration must be applied (although the PCA analysis in this study is not entirely dependent upon correctly calibrated scans, this is an important statistical correction that has utility in future geochemical queries). 
Mathematical Methodology
	An XRF detector operates by classifying the energy of incoming radiation and assigning the detected value to an element. Because the characteristic x-ray emissions of elements are important in differentiating one from another, accurate measurement of the radiation is essential, and requires a calibration step. The calibration process designates specific energy values (indicative of known elemental fluorescence response to excitement by X-rays) to single channels in the instrument’s multi-channel analyzer (MCA). Because the XRF can detect many elements and the MCA has numerous detection channels, known energy values were assigned to six channels, and a cubic spline interpolation was applied to the data to synthesize calibrated keV emission values for the collector channels between the six selected channels. A cubic spline function is advantageous over a linear calibration as the interpolated values between points (generally) produce more accurate calibrations across a wider spectrum of elements. Cubic spline calibrations have utility in reducing measurement error to ±0.02 keV (Espen, 2002).
y = Wa_0  + Xa_1  + Y〖a"〗_0  + Za”_1 
  W=(c_1-c_0)/(c_1-c_0 )				     X=1-W
Y=(1/6)(W^3-W) (c_1-c_0 )^2		Z=(1/6)(X^3-X) (c_1-c_0 )^2
To perform the calibration, three channels are needed, where “c” corresponds to the channel number, “a” the X-ray energy (in keV), and W, X, Y, and Z are substitutions for the primary equation (modified from Greaves, 2005). 
	The manually calculated spline calibration was then cross validated with an optimization calibration method. The equipment manufacturer (Bruker) produced a dataset with point by point comparisons of every element to mathematically predicted spectra (i.e. what the calibration spectra should look like under ideal circumstances). Bruker’s optimization calibration spectrum had a higher correlation coefficient with the mathematically modelled spectrum (which is expected when compared to my spline model which used only six values), thus the optimized calibration was employed over the spline model. Additionally, because Bruker’s calibration was tailored to elemental assemblages from mudrocks, this calibration strongly reflects the siliciclastic mineralogy of Range Creek Canyon sediment. A small section of an optimized calibration (where data from each band of every element exists) with data in keV is shown below in Figure 2. 
Figure 2.
 
	With an effective calibration determined, R was used to process the XRF data for principle component analysis. A workflow for each of the three cores was utilized as follows:
1. Load XRF (.pdz) data into R.
2. Generate single dataset with combined helium, yellow and green filter spectra.
3. Remove the depth component from the new dataset (because all the elemental data was generated along a depth profile in 2.0mm increments, the z-axis data is removed from the table for PCA).
4. Use complete.cases function to return a logical vector which identifies rows in the elemental data that are blank and exclude them from the analysis. The XRF failed to scan, on average, 4 horizons in each core, so removing those scans reduces the chances of errors influencing the PCA analysis.
5. Run prcomp() for single value decompression (SVD) based PCA.
6. Examine eigenvalues and PC’s to determine importance of components (proportion/cumulative proportion of variance). 
7. Plot components with imposed greyscale to illustrate grouping of elements relative to PCx and PCy (refine graphics to improve interpretability). Example:

Figure 3:

Results 
	Results for each of 3 cores is presented below in biplot form. The combined analysis of each of the three core’s first five principle components can be seen in the table, where the numerical values represent the cumulative proportion of variance explained by the first five components. Each of the core’s first five principle components explains approximately eighty percent of elemental variability. Beyond the fifth component, the cumulative proportion of explained variability increases only marginally to the 29th PC. Seventy percent of variability can be explained in the first three components alone, thus for the exploratory nature of this investigation, biplots for these data are included below. The stacked core data, where elemental information for each of the three cores was placed into a singular table, has very similar cumulative PCA data as the individual cores. 
Figure 4. 
PCA Analysis: Combined Table
	PC1	PC2	PC3	PC4	PC5
Core 1 (22.9)	0.3696	0.5887	0.6934	0.7409	0.77145
Core 2 (75)	0.3961	0.6095	0.6811	0.7481	0.78451
Core 3 (95)	0.3793	0.5977	0.67124	0.7416	0.77803
Stacked Data	0.3671	0.5827	0.67038	0.7209	0.76265



Core 1: 22.9m along E-W trench from easterly datum. 

 
  
Core one is characterized by strong positive clustering of most elements along dimension 1, where dimension two exhibits more heterogeneity, with numerous elements displaying negative correlations with the source of variability. Dimension three has clear positive clustering of labile divalent cations with the exception of barium, which is strongly negatively correlated with PC3. 
Core 2: 75m along E-W trench from easterly datum.

 
  
PCA plots for the second core (which lies 53m to the east of core 1) are noticeably different than those observed from the 22.9m sample. Dimension one is still classified by nearly homogenous (although not as strongly positively correlated across all elements as in core 1) positive correlation across elements, with the exception of phosphorus. Most elements exhibit negative correlation with PC2, with the exception of chromium and uranium. Dimension three is highly heterogeneous, with many metallic elements corelated positively to PC3, while others like manganese are negatively correlated. 
Core 3: 95m along E-W trench from easterly datum. 
 
  
Comparison of general PCA dynamics between cores 2 and 3 illustrate highly similar results across all three dimensions graphed. Data are not identical but imply similar governing depositional processes from these sample sites.  
Stacked PCA: All core data
 
  

The stacked plot is of great value as it represents the cumulative behavior of the mineralogical system along the trench, and more closely resembles the PCA plots from cores two and three than core one (taken at 23m). The disparity between PCA data corroborates inferences made in the field about the dramatic heterogeneity in stratigraphy and influence of micro-depositional environments on the geochemical composition of sediment. 
Discussion and Conclusion 
	The sheer quantity of elemental data and the large number of PCA plots is daunting in studying dominant controls on mineral abundance, but analysis of plots from unique cores side-by-side hints at sources of spatial variability in the canyon. Although figure 4 suggested that each of the four analyses were similar in the amount of variability explained by the first five principle components, the exact clustering of elements within PC 1, 2, and 3 are distinct between cores. This implies that although the same four or five geological processes are impacting the relative abundance of minerals in the first few meters of Range Creek sediment, the ranking of their dominance may vary across the 120m trench. 
	The clearest trend across all three sites is the strong positive correlation of elements with principle component 1. Based on the data collected thus far, I interpret PC1 to represent the influence of fluvial deposition of minerals across the flat Cherry Meadows region. The Cherry Meadows trench site (and core site) is more than 1000m in length and multiple hundred meters in width, suggesting that extensive fluvial avulsion across the floodplain was very likely throughout the Holocene. If one assumes that the course of the river varied substantially during this period (within the bounds of the constraining quartzose sandstone cliff walls), the effects of fluvial sediment deposition would effectively be homogenous across the length of the trench. Additionally, because river deposition is non-discriminatory (meaning no major thermodynamic or kinetic factors impact the elements involved in this process - unlike in diagenesis), one would expect to observe all elements from Na to Mo positively correlated with this component. The graphics generally support this expectation. 
	Disentangling the geological phenomena represented by PC2 and PC3 is a bit more difficult. The marked distinctions in the second- and third-dimension PCA plots between core 1 and cores 2/3 suggest that PC2 in core 1 may be explained by a different process than PC2 of cores 2 and 3. The presence of numerous labile divalent metallic cations in PC3 of core 1 is a strong indicator of mineral substitution by fluid flow (modern or paleo-groundwater flow), meaning that the westernmost site is influenced by: (1.) fluvial sediment deposition; (2.) diagenetic alteration; (3.) fluid flow and soluble cation exchange. Core 1 was also more intensely bioturbated than the easternmost cores, meaning that in addition to the diagenetic alteration and fluid flow mentioned above, the activity of plant material and bacteria may be driving the  
	Because the PCA plots of PC2 and PC3 are very similar for the 75m and 95m cores (2 and 3, respectively), the same second and third order processes are likely occurring across this twenty-meter section of the trench. The unique configuration of the plots for these two cores suggests that the second and third dimension of variability are distinct from the diagenetic alterations occurring on the opposing end of the meadow. This does not rule out the possible influence of chemical change post deposition, but mass wasting from the east canyon wall is likely a more dominant control on sediment lithology in this zone. This conclusion is supported from detailed cross sections from the eastern flank of the trench, where cobble to boulder sized, angular, non-imbricated quartz clasts intertongue with finer grained fluvial deposits. These episodic deposition events contrast the more continuous, low energy deposition by Range Creek (which is seen in lower flow regime sedimentary structures like 12-15cm deep cross beds). This would mean that the east section of Cherry Meadows has been shaped by the influences of: 1.) fluvial deposition, 2.) mass wasting and punctuated periods of high energy flows, and 3.) fluid-driven cation exchange. 
	The complexity of these PCA plots will require more detailed, long term analysis to tease out controlling factors for individual elemental signals. Nonetheless, the first few PCA analyses explored in this paper have illustrated marked geological heterogeneity across what was originally assumed to be a predictably uniform floodplain. If this region was in fact utilized for maize agriculture by the ancient Fremont people, the complex stratigraphy and variable influence of subsurface fluid flow may have had significant implications on crop yield and soil fertility. Moving forward from this analysis, it is necessary to examine the calibrated curves for individual elemental spectra as a function of depth (and time once an effective age model is established), and cross reference this data for core 1 with cores 2 and 3. Over the long term, more cores must be scanned to improve our capacity to track changes across the length of the trench. If the majority of cores reflect similar elemental assemblages as the 75m and 95m cores, then the samples collected in core 1 at 22.9m may be bearing the signal of more invasive anthropogenic influence, like the existence of an irrigation channel. More analysis needs to be done to arrive at these conclusions, but the current calibrations and PCA graphics are steps in the right direction. 
References
P. V. Espen, in Handbook of X-Ray Spectrometry, edited by R. E. V. Grieken and A. A. Markowicz (Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York, 2002), Chap. 4, p. 239- 242
Franczyk, Karen J., et al. "Paleocene depositional systems in the western Roan Cliffs, Utah." (1991): 111-128.
Greaves, E. D., et al. "Optimizing accuracy and precision in spectral data." X‐Ray Spectrometry: An International Journal34.3 (2005): 194-199.
Hotelling, H. (1933). Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components. Journal of Educational Psychology, 24, 417–441, and 498–520.
Kloor, Keith. "The vanishing Fremont." (2007): 1540-1543.
Swift, Donald JP, et al. "Shelf construction in a foreland basin: storm beds, shelf sandbodies, and shelf‐slope depositional sequences in the Upper Cretaceous Mesaverde Group, Book Cliffs, Utah." Sedimentology 34.3 (1987): 423-457.
Maitra, Saikat, and Jun Yan. "Principle component analysis and partial least squares: Two-dimension reduction techniques for regression." Applying Multivariate Statistical Models 79 (2008): 79-90.
Metcalfe, Duncan, Arnold, Shannon. “Geography and Geology of Range Creek.” Natural History Museum of Utah: Rio Tinto Center, University of Utah. 2012. 
Morris, Thomas H., Dean R. Richmond, and Jorge E. Marino. "The Paleocene/Eocene Colton formation: a fluvial-dominated lacustrine deltaic system, Roan Cliffs, Utah." (1991): 129-140.
Young, Robert G. "Sedimentary facies and intertonguing in the Upper Cretaceous of the Book Cliffs, Utah-Colorado." Geological Society of America Bulletin 66.2 (1955): 177-202.

